---           
layout: post
title: Shaping Up
category: me
tags: [running]
---

Wow! Almost nine months without any new posts on my website. I'm pretty bad with keeping up with
this thing. I wanted to start this post off with one line that I'm quite proud of:

> _I just turned 29 years old and I'm in the best shape of my life_.

This post will revolve around that one line, how I've gotten here, and where I want to go. I
apologize in advance because this kind of stuff has been written a million times before, and will
be written another million billion times. Disclaimer: I am not a health professional, so take any
health advice with a grain of salt. Every body is different and likely needs to be nurtured
differently.

## Background

In early 2013 I joined Google, and more specifically, YouTube. It was a wonderful experience that
I'll always be fond of. Living in the wonderful weather of the Bay Area, meeting some great people,
and getting to experience the awesomeness of working at one of the tech giants. Unfortunately,
living in the Bay Area took its toll, as I wasn't establishing much of a social life, and was
generally unhappy with life there. I ended up filling a lot of my spare time with Netflix and
snacks. I'm not a big guy by no means, but I still managed to put on a few pounds.

So I decided I needed a change. I left Google earlier this year, just one day after my two-year
work anniversary. I moved back to Canada to simplify and better my life; I'm now much closer to
family and no longer have to deal with crossing the border (sorry US friends, crossing your border
is often a terrible experience). 

## The Basics

Regular exercise and a healthy diet is vital. 5 years ago I would have laughed you away if you told
me that I would write that down in a blog post today. I'm not saying you need to hit the gym every
day, chowing down on spinach and celery, throw in some protein shakes and kale shakes, research all
of the latest health stuff, and all of this while carefully counting your calories. No, it's not
rocket science.

One of the most fundamental things you can do to improve your health is simply improving your diet.
It's going to be far easier for you to simply not have that bowl of ice cream than it will be to
burn off the extra 150 calories it's going to put into your body. That's probably a 1-2 mile run
there, in just that one bowl of ice cream. Alcohol is bad too. Not only is it going to add to your
calorie counter, but it's going to mess up your metabolism and make it harder to burn off those
calories.

"So I need to exercise a bunch to be healthy and maintain a body shape that I like?". No, you
really don't _have_ to. Just by existing, your body is burning off a bunch of calories. I'd
recommend regular exercise, but it's not nearly as important as the dietary changes. I'm not saying
you should go run a marathon. Go out walking for half an hour or an hour every day. Trust me. Your
body will thank you. You'll feel __more energetic__. You'll feel __more confident__. You'll be
generally __happier__. You deserve these things and with a tiny bit of effort you can have them.

## Where I Am

I started my journey into healthier habits a month and a half ago. I took what may be a different
approach to it all: I didn't want to go into any research, buy any fancy equipment, count my
calories, or really anything like that. I felt like healthy living was a simple thing and can be
achieved in a very organic manner.

First, my diet. I started off with smaller portions and cut back on my snacks. Whenever I did want
a snack I tried to replace it with a healthier option. Now, I still have a bowl of ice cream from
time to time &ndash; I absolutely love ice cream &ndash; but I know that having that bowl of ice
cream comes with a sacrifice: either a little more running or no other snacks. Or maybe I had a
healthy day so it's fine. I'm not keeping track of this stuff in detail, just keeping a mental
inventory from day to day.

Second, I started running regularly. About 5 times a week to be more specific. I had basically no
exercise since 2007, nearly 8 years of inactivity. Needless to say, it was a very rough start. I
could run about 500 meters in one go, and then a 10 minute walking break before I'd die in another
500 meter leg. I set a modest goal of running 2km nonstop by the end of the year. Today I broke 5km
nonstop, stopping not because I couldn't keep going, but rather to minimize my chance of injury. I
know some people run marathons, but I am super proud of this milestone.

## What I've Learned

Beyond the things I listed in "The Basics", I've learned a lot about setting personal goals.

First, __make your goals quantifiable__. Don't make goals that are so vague or poorly worded that
you really never know if you've achieved them. "I want to eat healthier this year" says nothing.
You can eat a ton of food and still be healthy if you happen to be burning off all of the calories.
Maybe you enjoy drinking, so a good goal would be "I want to limit myself to one drink per week".
A goal is something you reach, so make sure you know what the criteria is for achieving the goal.

Second, __shout your goals out loud__. Don't leave them lying around in your brain because I can
almost guarantee that they will be short-lived and forgotten. Write them down and stick them on the
fridge. Post them on your social network of choice and have people hold you to them. Tell a friend
with the condition that they get a free meal if you don't reach them. __You're trying to better
yourself here, so don't take it lightly__.

Finally, don't be afraid to __set your goals high__. I was incredibly modest when I started and
said "by the end of 2015 I'll run 2km nonstop". I broke that goal within a few weeks of running,
and started consistently breaking it not too long ago. The first time I broke that goal I set my
goal to do 5km nonstop, and when I saw that I could do this before the end of the year I shifted it
up to 10km. Today I decided that I'm being too modest with my goals, so I decided that next summer
I will run a half marathon.

## &Sigma;ing It Up

I've started posting with the #notrocketscience hash tag on Twitter because I believe that healthy
living doesn't require research, special diet programs, gym memberships, or anything else like
that. I head out regularly for a jog, I try to eat things that I believe are healthy, and moderate
anything outside of my control. I minimize my alcohol consumption. I take little walk breaks at
work.

All of this adds up, because I just turned 29 years old and I'm in the best shape of my life.
