---
title: Modeling 101
category: dev
tags: [graphics, c++, gamedev]
description: >-
  I'm not great at 3D modelling, but I did it anyways. No, this post is not an introduction to how
  you can do 3D modelling yourself. Mostly just talking about the GUI framework I'm using.
---

Okay, this is far from me giving you a 101 class on modeling, because when it comes to
drawing/modeling/things of that nature I suck pretty bad. Nevertheless, I amazed myself at how
quickly I whipped up a "stick man" model with a basic skeleton using
[Blender](https//www.blender.org/).

![modeling screenshot](/img/2010_Feb_10.png)

He's in a sitting pose, waving (I think). Yeah, I have skills _cough_. Anyways, other than a crash
here and there, Blender is a pretty decent piece of software. Some of the keyboard shortcuts are
non-intuitive but once you get them down you'll be unstoppable.

That screenshots also shows off my integration of [CEGUI](http://cegui.org.uk/) into my WIP. I
struggled with two issues that I'll share with people. The first issue was that you need to have the
OpenGL viewport set up correctly when initializing CEGUI. Unfortunately my initialization was
occurring before I called `glViewport`, but that was easily resolved. The second thing was that
having any VBOs / VAOs bound messes up CEGUI (for now). Be sure to release any bound buffers/arrays
before rendering things.

CEGUI is a pretty hefty library, but it looks to be incredibly robust and still actively developed.
I loved how I could manually inject input events into the CEGUI system, which meant easy integration
into my own windowing system. I noticed that some other systems used existing input libraries or
hooked into something like [GLUT](https://www.opengl.org/resources/libraries/glut/) or
[SDL](https://www.libsdl.org/) . I also love the ability to use describe things in XML. I think
CEGUI and I will get along quite fine until I decide to write my own UI system.

There was a bit of messing around getting things to link properly, but I managed to get everything
working in the end. I'll finish off by pointing out
[qmake](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qmake-manual.html). I use it for my Makefile generation and I
absolutely love it, mainly because it's incredibly simple. [CMake](https://www.cmake.org/) is
another option if you happen to be looking for one.
